$1.87. That was all. She had put her to side, one cent and then another and then another,
in her careful buying of meat and other food. Della counted it three times. $1.87. There
is little more to say about it. In the hall below was a letter-box, too small to hold
a letter. There was an electric bell, but it could not make a sound. Also there was
a name beside the door, Mr. James Dillingham Young. But when Mr. James
Dillingham Young entered the furnished rooms, his name became very short indeed.
Mrs. James Dillingham Young put her arms warmly about him and called him Jim.
You have already met her. She is Della. Della finished her crying and cleaned the
marks of it from her face. She stood by the window and looked out with no
interest. Tomorrow would be Christmas Day and she had only $1.87 with which to
buy Jim a gift. She had put aside as much as she could for months with this
result. $20 a week is not much. Everything had cost more than she had
expected. It always happened like that. Only $1.87 to buy a gift for Jim. Her
Jim. She had had many happy hours planning something nice for him. Something
nearly good enough. Something almost worth the honor of belonging to Jim.
There was a looking glass between the windows of the room. Perhaps you have
seen the kind of looking glass that is placed in eight furnished rooms. It
was very narrow. A person could see only a little of himself at a time. However,
if he was very thin and moved very quickly, he might be able to get a good
view of himself. Della, being quite thin, had mastered this art. Suddenly
she turned from the window and stood before the glass. Her eyes were shining
brightly, but her face had lost its color. Quickly she pulled down her hair and
let it fall to its complete length. The James Dillingham Youngs were very
proud of two things which they owned. One thing was Jim's gold watch. It
had once belonged to his father, and long ago it had belonged to his
father's father. The other thing was Della's hair. If her queen had
lived in the rooms near theirs, Della would have washed and dried her
hair where the queen could see it. Della knew her hair was more
beautiful than any queen's jewels and gifts. If a king had lived in
the same house with all his riches, Jim would have looked at his
watch every time they met. Jim knew that no king had anything so
valuable. So now Della's beautiful hair fell about her shining
like a falling stream of brown water. It reached below her me. It
almost made itself into a dress for her. And then she put it up
on her head again, nervously and quickly, once she stopped for a
moment and stood still while a tear or two ran down her face. She put
on her old brown coat. She put on her old brown hat. Mrs.
Sifroni, large, too white, cold-eyed, looked at her.
"'Will you buy my hair?' asked Della.
"'I buy hair,' said Mrs. Sifroni. "'Take your hat off and let me look at it.'
Down fell the brown waterfall.
"'Twenty dollars,' said Mrs. Sifroni, lifting the hair to
feel its weight.
"'Give it to me quick,' said Della. "'Oh, and the next two hours seemed to fly.'
She was going from one shop to another to find a gift for Jim.
She found it at last. It surely had been made for Jim and no
one else. There was no other like it in any of the shops, and
she had looked in every shop in the city. It was a gold watch
chain, very simply made. Its value was in its rich and pure
material. Because it was so plain and simple, you knew that it
was very valuable. All good things are like this. It was good
enough for the watch. As soon as she saw it, she knew that Jim
must have it. It was like him, quietness and value. Jim and the
chain both had quietness and value. She paid twenty-one dollars
for it, and she hurried home with the chain and eighty-seven
cents. With that chain on his watch, Jim could look at his
watch and learn the time anywhere he might be. Though the
watch was so fine, it had never had a fine chain. He sometimes
took it out and looked at it only when no one could see him do
it. When Della arrived home, her mind quieted a little. She
began to think more reasonably. She started to try to cover the
sad marks of what she had done. Love and large-hearted
giving, when added together, can leave deep marks. It is
never easy to cover these marks, dear friends. Never easy. Within
forty minutes her head looked a little better. With her short
hair she looked wonderfully like a schoolboy. She stood at the
looking-glass for a long time.
If Jim doesn't kill me, she said to herself, before he looks at
me a second time, he'll say, I look like a girl who sings and
dances for money. But what could I do? Oh, what could I—what
could I do with a dollar and eighty-seven cents? Jim was never
late. Della held the watch chain in her hand and sat near the
door where he always entered. Then she heard his step in the
hall and her face lost color for a moment. She often said little
prayers quietly, about simple everyday things. And now she
said, Please God, make him think. And now she said, Please
God, make him think I'm still pretty. He needed a new coat
and he had nothing to cover his cold hands. Jim stopped inside
the door. He was as quiet as a hunting dog when it is near a
bird. His eyes looked strangely at Della, and there was an
expression in them that she could not understand. It filled her
with fear. It was not anger, nor surprise, nor anything she
had been ready for. He simply looked at her with that
strange expression on his face. Della went to him.
Jim, dear, she cried, Don't look at me like that. I had my hair cut
off and sold it. I couldn't live through Christmas without
giving you a gift. My hair will grow again. You won't care, will
you? My hair grows very fast. It's Christmas, Jim. Let's be
happy. You don't know what a nice—what a beautiful nice
gift I got for. You don't know what a nice—what a beautiful
nice gift I got for you. He seemed to labor to understand
what had happened. He seemed not to feel sure he knew.
Cut it off, and sold it, said Della. Don't you like me now?
I'm me, Jim. I'm the same without my hair. Jim looked around the
room. You say your hair is gone, he said. You don't have to look
for it, said Della. It's sold, I tell you. Sold and gone, too.
It's the night before Christmas, boy. Be good to me, because I
sold it for you. Maybe the hairs of my head could be
counted, she said. But no one could ever count my love for you.
Shall we eat dinner, Jim? Jim put his arms around his Della.
For ten seconds let us look in another direction. Eight dollars
a week, or a million dollars a year. How different are they?
Someone may give. You and answer, but it will be wrong. The
Magi brought valuable gifts, but that was not among them.
My meaning will be explained soon. Someone may give you an
answer, but it will be wrong. He threw it upon the table.
I want you to understand me, Dell, he said. Nothing like a haircut
could make me love you any less. But if you'll open that, you may
know what I felt when I came in. White fingers pulled off the
paper, and then a cry of joy, and then a change to tears.
For there lay the combs. The combs that Della had seen in a
shop window, and loved for a long time. Beautiful combs, with
jewels, perfect for her beautiful hair. She had known they cost too
much for her to buy them. She had looked at them without the
least hope of owning them. And now they were hers, but her hair
was gone. But she held them to her heart, and at last was able
to look up and say, My hair grows so fast, Jim. And then she
jumped up and cried, Oh, oh! Jim had not yet seen his
beautiful gift. She held it out to him in her open hand. The
gold seemed to shine softly as if with her own warm and loving
spirit. Della, said he, Let's put our Christmas gifts away and
keep them awhile. They're too nice to use now. I sold the watch to
get the money to buy the combs. And now I think we should have
our dinner. The Magi, as you know, were wise men, wonderfully
wise men, who brought gifts to the newborn Christ child. They
were the first to give Christmas gifts. Being wise, their gifts
were doubtless wise ones. And here I have told you the story of
two children who were not wise. Each sold the most valuable
thing he owned in order to buy a gift for the other. But let me
speak a last word to the wise of these days. Of all who give
gifts, these two were the most wise. Of all who give and
receive gifts, such as, They are the most wise. Everywhere,
they are the wise ones. They are the Magi.